# CED Data -- Topic 9.9: Continuity and Change in a Globalized World

## Unit: 9 -- Globalization
## Exam Weight: 8-10%
## Time Period: c. 1900-present

## Learning Objectives
- LO I: Explain the extent to which science and technology brought change in the period from 1900 to the present.
- LO G: Short-Answer Question Skill Learning Objective 2.A, 5.B
- LO B: Unit 4: Learning Objectives E, K, M Free-Response Question Question Type Skill Thematic Focus Learning Objective Document- based 1.B, 2.B, 4.A, 5.B, 6.A, 6.B, 6.C, 6.D GOV, TEC Unit 7: Learning Objectives B, C, E, F, G, Long essay 1.A, 1.B, 4.A, 5.B, 6.A, 6.B, 6.C, 6.D ECN, GOV, SIO, TEC Unit 5: Learning Objectives D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K The scoring information for the questions within this course and exam description, along with further exam resources, can be found on the AP World History Exam Page on AP Central. Exam Information V.1 | 217AP History Rubrics Introductory notes: Bullet Except where otherwise noted, each point of the rubric is earned independently. For instance, a student could earn a point for evidence beyond the documents without earning a point for thesis/claim. Bullet Accuracy: The components of this rubric each require that students demonstrate historically defensible content knowledge. Given the timed nature of the exam, a response may contain errors that do not detract from its overall quality, as long as the historical content used to advance the argument is accurate. Bullet Clarity:Examessaysshouldbeconsideredfirstdraftsandthusmaycontain grammatical errors. Those errors will not be counted against a student unless they obscure the successful demonstration of the content knowledge, skills, and reasoning processes described in the rubrics. AP History DBQ Rubric (7 points) Reporting Category Scoring Criteria Decision Rules A. THESIS/CLAIM (0–1 pt) 1 pt. Responds to the prompt with a historically defensible thesis/ claim that establishes a line of reasoning. To earn this point, the thesis must make a claim that responds to the prompt rather than restating or rephrasing the prompt. The thesis must consist of one or more sentences located in one place, either in the introduction or the conclusion. B. CONTEXTUALIZATION (0–1 pt) 1 pt. Describes a broader historical context relevant to the prompt. To earn this point, the response must describe broader historical events, developments, or processes that occur before, during, or continue after the time frame of the prompt that are relevant to the topic. This point is not awarded for merely a phrase or reference. Exam Information V.1 | 218Reporting Category Scoring Criteria Decision Rules C. EVIDENCE (0–3 pts) Evidence From the Documents 1 pt. Uses the content of at least three documents to address the topic of the prompt. OR 2 pts. Supports an argument in response to the prompt using at least four documents. To earn one point, the response must accurately describe — rather than simply quote — the content from at least three of the documents. To earn two points, the response must accurately describe — rather than simply quote — the content from at least four documents. In addition, the response must use the content of the four documents to support an argument in response to the prompt. Evidence Beyond the Documents 1 pt. Uses at least one additional pieceofspecifichistorical evidence (beyond that found in the documents) relevant to an argument in response to the prompt. To earn this point, the response must describe the evidence and must use more than a phrase or reference. This additional piece of evidence must be different from the evidence used to earn the point for contextualization. Exam Information V.1 | 219Reporting Category Scoring Criteria Decision Rules D. ANALYSIS AND REASONING (0–2 pts) 1 pt. For at least two documents, explains how or why the document’s point of view, purpose, historical situation, and/or audience is relevant to an argument. To earn this point, the response must explain how or why (rather than simply identifying) the document’s point of view, purpose, historical situation, or audience is relevant to an argument about the prompt for each of the two documents sourced. 1 pt. Demonstrates a complex understanding of the historical development that is the focus of the prompt through sophisticated argumentation and/oreffectiveuseofevidence. A response may demonstrate a complex understanding through sophisticated argumentation that is relevant to the prompt. This may be done in a variety of ways, such as: Bullet Explaining multiple themes or perspectives to explore complexity or nuance; OR Bullet Explaining multiple causes or effects, multiple similarities or differences, or multiple continuities or changes; OR Bullet Explaining both cause and effect, both similarity and difference, or both continuity and change; OR Bullet Explaining relevant and insightful connections within and across periods or geographical areas. These connections should clearly relate to an argument that responds to the prompt. A response may demonstrate a complex understanding through effective use of evidence relevant to an argument that addresses the prompt. This may be done in a variety of ways, such as: Bullet Effectively using seven documents to support an argument that responds to the prompt; OR Bullet Explaining how the point of view, purpose, historical situation, and/or audience of at least four documents supports an argument that responds to the prompt; OR Bullet Using documents and evidence beyond the documents effectively to demonstrate a sophisticated understanding of different perspectives relevant to the prompt. This complex understanding must be part of the argument and may be demonstrated in any part of the response. While it is not necessary for this complex understanding to be woven throughout the response, it must be more than merely a phrase or reference. Exam Information V.1 | 220AP History Long Essay Question Rubric AP History LEQ Rubric (6 points) Reporting Category Scoring Criteria Decision Rules A. THESIS/CLAIM (0–1 pt) 1 pt. Responds to the prompt with a historically defensible thesis/claim that establishes a line of reasoning. To earn this point, the thesis must make a claim that responds to the prompt, rather than restating or rephrasing the prompt. The thesis must consist of one or more sentences located in one place, either in the introduction or the conclusion. B. CONTEXTUALIZATION (0–1 pt) 1 pt. Describes a broader historical context relevant to the prompt. To earn this point, the response must describe broader historical events, developments, or processes that occur before, during, or continue after the time frame of the prompt that are relevant to the topic. This point is not awarded for merely a phrase or a reference. C. EVIDENCE (0–2 pts) 1 pt. Provides specific examples of at least two pieces of evidence relevant to the topic of the prompt. OR 2 pts. Supports an argument in response to the prompt using at least two pieces ofspecificand relevant evidence. To earn one point, the response must identify specific historical examples relevant to the topic of the prompt. To earn two points the response must use specific historical evidence to support an argument in response to the prompt. Exam Information V.1 | 221Reporting Category Scoring Criteria Decision Rules D. ANALYSIS AND REASONING (0–2 pts) 1 pt. Uses historical reasoning (e.g. comparison, causation, CCOT) to frame or structure an argument that addresses the prompt. OR 2 pts. Demonstrates a complex understanding of the historical development that is the focus of the prompt through sophisticated argumentation and/oreffective use of evidence. To earn the first point, the response must demonstrate the use of historical reasoning to frame or structure an argument, although the reasoning might be uneven or imbalanced, or the evidence may be overly general or lacking specificity. To earn the second point, the response may demonstrate a complex understanding through sophisticated argumentation that is relevant to the prompt. This may be done in a variety of ways, such as: Bullet Explaining multiple themes or perspectives to explore complexity or nuance; OR Bullet Explaining multiple causes or effects, multiple similarities or differences, or multiple continuities or changes; OR Bullet Explaining both cause and effect, both similarity and difference, or both continuity and change; OR Bullet Explaining relevant and insightful connections within and across periods or geographical areas. These connections should clearly relate to an argument that responds to the prompt. A response may demonstrate a complex or nuanced understanding through effective use of evidence relevant to an argument that addresses the prompt. This may be done in a variety of ways, such as: Bullet Explaining how multiple pieces of specific and relevant evidence (at least four) support a nuanced or complex argument that responds to the prompt; OR Bullet Using evidence effectively to demonstrate a sophisticated understanding of different perspectives relevant to the prompt. This complex understanding must be part of the argument and may be demonstrated in any part of the response. While it is not necessary for this complex understanding to be woven throughout the response, it must be more than merely a phrase or reference. Exam Information V.1 | 222Scoring Guidelines V.1 |AP WORLD HISTORY: MODERN Scoring Guidelines Part B: Short-Answer Question with Secondary Source 1. Use the passage below to answer all parts of the question that follows. “Having questioned Sidotti,* I understand that Christians teach that their God produced heaven and earth and make him out to be the Great Lord and Father. This God of theirs, they say, cannot be served without giving him all of one’s love and all of one’s reverence. What these Christians are in effect saying is this: I have a [real] father, but I do not love him because I reserve all my love for God; I have a [real] lord, but I don’t revere him because I reserve all my reverence for God. Now this is what we call being impious and disloyal! According to the Book of Rites, it is the emperor, the Son of Heaven, who should be worshiping God, the Lord of Heaven. It is not a duty that is given to ordinary people. And that is in order to prevent the blurring of the line between the exalted and the base. Thus, the sovereign is Heaven to the subjects just as the father is Heaven to the child.” *GiovanniBattistaSidottiwasanItalianpriestwhohadenteredJapanin1708,inviolationoftheJapanesegovernment’sprohibitiononChristian missionary activities. Arai Hakuseki, Japanese scholar and adviser to the Tokugawa shogun, report, circa 1720 (A) Describe ONE way in which Hakuseki’s argument was influenced by long-standing Asian cultural traditions. (B) Explain ONE way in which the religious encounter referred to in the passage differed from most other religious encounters in the period circa 1450–1750. (C) Explain ONE historical situation in the period 1450–1750, other than the one illustrated in the passage, in which states in Asia or Africa adopted policies to limit European political power or cultural influence. 223

## Essential Knowledge (Historical Developments)
- KC-6.1: Rapid advances in science and technology altered the understanding of the universe and the natural world and led to advances in communication, transportation, industry, agriculture, and medicine.
- KC-6.1.I.A: Newmodesofcommunication— including radio communication, cellular communication,andtheinternet—aswell as transportation, including air travel and shipping containers, reduced the problem of geographic distance.
- KC-6.1.III.B: Moreeffectiveformsofbirthcontrol gave women greater control over fertility, transformed reproductive practices, and contributed to declining rates of fertility in much of the world.
- KC-6.3.I: States responded in a variety of ways to the economic challenges of the 20th century.
- KC-6.3.III.i: Rights-baseddiscourseschallengedold assumptions about race, class, gender, and religion.
- KC-6.3.III.ii: In much of the world, access to education as well as participation in new political and professional roles became more inclusive in terms of race, class, gender, and religion.
- KC-6.3.IV.i: Political and social changes of the 20th century led to changes in the arts and in the second half of the century, popular and consumer culture became more global.
- KC-6.3.IV.ii: Arts, entertainment, and popular culture increasinglyreflectedtheinfluen globalizedsociety. ce of a
- KC-6.3.IV.iii: Consumerculturebecameglobalizedand transcended national borders.THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

## Historical Thinking Skills
- Argumentation (6.D): Corroborate, qualify, or modify an argument using diverse and alternative evidence in order to develop a complex argument. This argument might: Bullet Explain nuance of an issuebyanalyzing multiple variables. Bullet Explain relevant and insightful connections within and across periods. Bullet Explain the relative historicalsignificance of a source’s credibility and limitations. Bullet Explain how or why a historical claim or argument is or isnoteffective.LEARNING OBJECTIVE
- Contextualization: Multiple-choicequestionsassessstudents’ ability to identify and describe a historical contextforaspecifichistoricaldevelopment orprocessaswellasexplainhowaspecific development or process is situated within a broader historical context. Thedocument-basedquestion and long essay question assess students’ ability to describe a broader historical context relevant to the topic of the question. One or twooftheshort-answerquestions may also assess this skill. Skill 5: Making Connections Multiple-choicequestionsassessstudents’ abilitytoanalyzepatternsandconnections between and among historical developments and processes using historical reasoning (e.g., comparison, causation, continuity and change). Thedocument-basedquestion, long essay question, and one ormoreoftheshort-answer questions all assess this skill. Skill 6:

## Key Terms/Concepts
- (See essential knowledge statements above)

---
*Source: AP World History: Modern Course and Exam Description (CED), College Board, 2020*